/**

@mainpage

@htmlonly <b>For the impatient:</b> On the left side you can find a
menu, listing the most important topics. If you're new it is a good
idea to simply go through the topics from top to bottom. They will
provide you with the necessary information to work with openWNS
beginning with the "Download" section. At the right side you can find
another menu. This menu contains links to the (C++) documentation of
the different modules and libraries available for openWNS.@endhtmlonly

The open Wireless Network Simulator (openWNS) is a highly modular
simulator for performance evaluation of mobile radio networks. It is
written in C++ (with Python support for configuration) and developed
at <a href="http://www.comnets.rwth-aachen.de">ComNets, RWTH Aachen
University</a>. It allows for stochastic simulations based on
prototypic protocol implementations.

The goal of this project is to provide a simulator which is suiteable
for all kinds of performance evaluation of wireless networks. A point
of special interest is the support of cellular mobile radio
networks. The key idea is to have a flexible framework which allows
the researcher to adapt the grade of complexity/accuracy to his needs
for the respective simulation/investigation.

The second major goal of this project is to provide a simulator which
supports the developer/researcher in testing his implementations in
order to help him find errors at very early stages during his
investigation. Therefor it provides comfortable to use testing
frameworks at different levels of testing (from Unit Testing to System
Testing). These frameworks have been carefully tailored to an
event-driven, stochastic simulation system.

We hope you enjoy working with openWNS,

Your openWNS Team

*/
